i have a
friend who's an artist and he's
sometimes taken of you which i
don't agree with very well you'll hold
up a flower and say
look how beautiful it is and i'll agree
and he says you see as i as an artist
can see how beautiful this is
but you as a scientist oh take this all
apart and it becomes a dull
thing and i think that he's kind of
nutty
first of all the beauty that he sees is
available to other
people and to me too i believe although
i may not be quite as refined as
aesthetically as his but i can
appreciate the beauty of a flower
at the same time i see much more about
the flower than he sees
i could imagine the cells the
complicated actions inside which also
have a beauty
i mean it's not just beauty at this
dimension of one centimeter there's also
beauty in a smaller dimensions
the inner structure also the processes
the fact that the colors and the flower
evolved in order to attract insects to
pollinate it
is interesting it means that insects can
see the color
it adds a question is this aesthetic
sense also exist in the law of forms
does it why is it aesthetic all kinds of
interesting questions
which the science knowledge only adds
to the excitement the mystery and the
awe of a flower it only adds i don't
understand how it subtracts
[Music]
welcome to topcast episode 33 chapter 14
of the beginning of infinity titled
why are flowers beautiful now that's
just your opinion that flowers are
beautiful
so they're not in any objective sense
that was a quick episode so look forward
to next week for the evolution of
culture
of course that would be ridiculous it's
so easy it's such a general purpose
objection to say
well it's just your opinion that that
movie was a bad movie it's just your
opinion that
justin bieber is a bad singer it's just
your opinion that
mozart is a better composer than someone
else
it's one of those arguments that
everyone knows this idea
that in art or music or movies or
fiction there's no objective standards
and that
everyone just has their opinion it's
merely a matter of taste and so we're
never going to converge on what is
actually good
when it comes to art well we're going to
explore that today
we're going to explore that through the
lens of why flowers are beautiful
and when we say beautiful we're going to
come to understand that what this means
at least in part is
attractiveness so i began this episode
with a short
clip from richard feynman well where he
tells the story about
a proverbial friend who comes to him and
complains about physicists and says
euphysis you like to
deconstruct things that's just denuding
the beauty of nature by
explaining it and of course feynman's
response is
that's completely wrong it doesn't ruin
anything by explaining it in fact it
enhances it the beauty of
the rainbow is available to the
physicist just as it is to anyone else
that kind of beauty that kind of visual
beauty but there's a deeper beauty as
well
there's a beauty of the theory itself
which explains why the rainbow happens
and there's the beauty of the feeling of
understanding of comprehending what's
actually going on there
these simple laws acting on simple
objects in the universe
to cause marvelous effects taking white
light and splitting it into all the
colors of the rainbow that's a beautiful
thing to understand
and that's a kind of beauty not
available to someone who doesn't
understand the physics
so a physicist isn't removing beauty or
removing beauty by explaining something
and i think feynman's point when he
talks about is that people should
want to try to understand things like
that to understand physics to the extent
that they're interested in it because it
is a kind of beauty
it is a way of appreciating the world
that otherwise wouldn't be available to
you
it's similar to the criticism that some
people trained in the classics or
trained in the arts
make of people trained in the sciences
possibly rightly
that if you don't understand shakespeare
you don't understand some of the great
works if you don't haven't read the
classic philosophers
then you are missing something of the
beauty of reality
the reality that is being created by
people of course
indeed at least in years gone by
not so much today in fact it's the other
way around but in years gone by
it was said that even if you were well
trained in science and mathematics
you were nonetheless uneducated if you
didn't read
if you didn't read the classics if you
didn't have a good understanding of
shakespeare and homer and the humanities
let's say
and it used to be rarely said in the
other direction you know if you didn't
understand shakespeare then you were
regarded as uneducated
but if you didn't understand the second
law of thermodynamics but nonetheless
you had a bachelor of arts degree
you were still educated there was no sin
in not understanding the second law of
thermodynamics let's say
but now of course we've got the problem
the pendulum swing in the other
direction
i think this pendulum that does swing in
either direction is is misconceived
but today of course there's a lot of
accusations made of people at least on
social media anyway
accusations made from one person to
another that so-and-so is scientifically
ignorant
now of course it might be true all of us
are ignorant to some extent but to claim
that it's a sin
or that you have no right to speak on a
certain topic because you are ignorant
of that topic
that is completely misconceived it's no
sin to be ignorant
ignorance is the common state of
humanity we are all
infinitely ignorant as popper has taught
us what perhaps is a sin
what perhaps is a sin is claiming to
have knowledge that you do not have of
course that can be wrong
or refusing to learn anything further
once you think you know something
whether that's in the realm of the arts
or the humanities
or in science okay but that discussion
is taking us a little bit far away from
the point of the chapter
a good supplement to this video not only
is the book of course
but also david deutsch has a an
excellent talk that he gave
to the museum of modern art and that's
available on youtube i'll link to that
as well
or you can just type in david deutsch
flowers into the
the youtube search bar and it'll bring
that up now all of that said
let's get into chapter 14 why are
flowers beautiful
and it begins with a quote from richard
dawkins writing in his book
climbing mountain probable which was
written in 1996 published in 1996
and dawkins wrote my daughter juliet
then aged
six pointed out some flowers by the
wayside
i asked her what she thought wildflowers
were for she gave a rather thoughtful
answer
two things she said to make the world
pretty and to help the bees make honey
for us
i was touched by this and sorry i had to
tell her that it wasn't true
end quote and then david goes on
for another quote displace one note and
there would be diminishment
displace one phrase and the structure
would fall that is how mozart's music is
described in peter schaefer's 1979 play
armadales should also uh best pause
there my
uh interjection here there's also a
movie based upon that play
of the same name amadeus the movie was
made in 1984
it got 11 academy award nominations it
won best picture for that year
um it's burned into my mind because i
was brought up in the star wars
generation which is around this same era
and like many people who were brought up
in the star wars generation list many
young
boys anyway we watched the movie so
often we could recite the words off by
heart
the only other movie i think that i'm
able to still recite
most of the words off by heart to would
be amadeus it's one of the movies that i
really enjoyed as a kid
i don't really know why i think my
grandmother had me watch it at some
point and then i just fell in love with
the music as well as the story
but the music was so wonderful and that
led me into an appreciation of classical
music
which was rather an odd thing for a
young boy
um at least where i was from anyway and
so
yeah i never learned to play classical
music i am not musically inclined in any
way shape or form
but i certainly appreciate classical
music
okay let's get back to the book enough
about me so david has just said um
displace one note and there would be
diminishment displace one phrase and the
structure would fall
this is reminiscent of the remark made
by john archibald wheeler with which
this
book begins speaking of a hoped-for
unified theory of fundamental physics
an idea so simple so beautiful that when
we grasp it
how could it have been otherwise
schaefer and wheeler were describing the
same attribute
being hard to vary while still doing the
job in the first case
it is an attribute of aesthetically good
music and in the second of good
scientific explanations
and wheeler speaks of the scientific
theory as being
beautiful in the same breath as
describing it as hard to vary
scientific theories are hard to vary
because they correspond closely with an
objective truth
which is independent of our culture our
personal preferences
and our biological makeup but what made
peter shaffer think that mozart's music
is hard to vary
the prevailing view among both artists
and non-artists is i think
that there is nothing objective about
artistic standards
beauty says the adage is in the eye of
the beholder the very phrase
it's a matter of taste is used
interchangeably with there is no
objective truth of the matter
artistic standards are in this view
nothing more than artifacts of fashion
and other cultural accidents
or of individual whim or of biological
predisposition
many are willing to concede that in
science and mathematics one idea can be
objectively truer than another
though as we have seen some deny even
that but most insist there is no such
thing as one object being objectively
more beautiful than another
mathematics has its proofs so the
argument goes and science has its
experimental tests
but if you choose to believe that mozart
was an inept and cacophonous composer
then neither logic nor experiment nor
anything else objective
will ever contradict you okay pause
there skipping over the next bit
where david compares that objection to
empiricism
and also he begins to introduce the idea
and although we may not able be able to
yet or perhaps even at any time in the
near future be able to use science to
objectively
show or prove or provide evidence that a
particular
piece of art is objectively better than
another piece of art
this does not mean there's no
objectivity to it
because facts can nonetheless be brought
to bear to criticize
aesthetic theories he says facts can be
used to criticize
aesthetic theories as they can moral
theories but i'm skipping all of that
and i will pick it up where david says
just as brunowski pointed out that
scientific discovery depends upon a
commitment to certain moral values
might it not also entail the
appreciation of certain forms of beauty
it is a fact often mentioned but seldom
explained
that deep truth is often beautiful
mathematicians and theoretical
scientists call this form of beauty
elegance elegance is the beauty in
explanations it is by no means
synonymous with how good or how true an
explanation is
the poet john keats assertion which i
think was ironic
that beauty is truth truth beauty is
refuted by what the evolutionist thomas
huxley called
the great tragedy of science the slang
of a beautiful hypothesis by an ugly
fact which is so constantly being
enacted under the eyes of philosophers
by philosophers he meant scientists i
think huxley too was being ironic in
calling this process a great tragedy
especially since he was referring to the
refutation of spontaneous generation
theories
but it is true that some important
mathematical proofs and some scientific
theories
are far from elegant yet the truth so
often is elegant that elegance
is at least a useful heuristic when
searching for fundamental truths
and when a beautiful hypothesis is slain
it is more often not replaced
as the spontaneous generation theory was
by a more beautiful one
surely this is not coincidence it is a
regularity in nature
so it must have an explanation okay
pause down my very brief reflection so
we've got the idea here
of beauty in science and mathematics
beauty of a
theorem being a useful heuristic a
useful rule a useful guide
in order to point us in the right
direction as to what we're looking for
when it comes to truth now that's one
aspect of this
the other aspect is the fact that that
is routinely
what we find in science and mathematics
that more often than not
regularly we find that elegance is a
guide to the truth is itself in need of
an explanation
why should that be so okay and then
david begins to talk about a comparison
between
creation and art and creation in science
and and the important point in this
paragraph that i'm just skipping through
is that both the scientists and the
artists
or the musical composer have waste paper
baskets
what does that mean well if you're a
scientist and you're trying to find the
answer to a particular question a
particular scientific question or a
mathematician trying to show some
theorem
and you're making mistakes along the way
you're throwing out discarding what you
got wrong when you've detected your
errors
what does a musical composer do if it's
all mere creativity
uncoupled from criticism uncoupled from
comparisons to some objective standard
to a reality that's out there in some
way then
there shouldn't be any need for the
waste paper basket
because you're not comparing it to any
objective criteria
but there must be an objective criteria
because not only does the music meet
your standards but it meets the
standards of many other people as well
so the composer is not merely creating
in some unhinged way but they are
creating within the scope of certain
criteria
certain objective criteria for beauty
within the area of music and so when
they make errors in that
that gets discovered in the waste paper
basket so this is the significance of
the waste paper basket within both
science and art it is a metaphor for the
fact that you can make errors it's
possible to be wrong
in both domains and being wrong is
objective
you're either wrong or you're not and
david goes on to write quote
composers like ludwig van beethoven
agonised through change after change
apparently seeking something that they
knew was there to be created
apparently meeting a standard that could
be met only after much creative effort
and much failure scientists often do the
same in both science and art there are
the exceptional creators like mozart
or the mathematician srinivasa ramanajan
who reputedly made
brilliant contributions without any such
effort
but from what we know of knowledge
creation we have to conclude that in
such cases the effort and the mistakes
did happen
invisibly inside their brains paused
down my reflection
such an important point there is
a mystique about mathematicians
certainly and when it comes to these
phenomenal mathematicians like romana
jan is one of the most famous
mathematicians even among mathematicians
there is this mystique about how exactly
they're doing what they're doing
not only is there this mystique among
the general community
about mathematicians because the
overwhelming majority of people are not
particularly knowledgeable about
mathematics and i include myself in this
category even though i did university
level mathematics
i look at the overwhelming majority of
mathematics at the university level and
i
don't have a clue about what's going on
really so mathematics has this mistake
in the community but beyond that
when you get into particularly excellent
mathematicians there is
a further layer or level of
mystery when it comes to these people as
if they have some access to
divinely inspired truth and it's
almost it's it's very similar in many
ways to
the way people used to think of
religious leaders
as if for example the pope had a direct
line
somehow to god or merely priesthood you
still hear people talk this way today
about the dalai
lama and many people claim that there is
just something about him that
is different to everyone else and it
might very well be true
that might be the case but it's not like
it is
something truly mystical or supernatural
or something that can't be understood if
you merely apply yourself
to try and understand that same is true
of mathematics now romana jan
is held up often as the exception to
this rule of
being able to understand if only you
tried hard enough
he's supposedly someone who simply was
able to write down
theorems without proof
now there's an excellent book by hardy
a mathematician's apology uh very much
worth reading and it's about
hardy andrew managing romana jan was
from india he was brought by
hardy to england ramanujan
did not live long in england
unfortunately he
he only lived a few years he got sick
he died very young very sad
and there's there's a movie based upon
this book uh as well
um well there's a there's a book based
upon that account
called the man who knew infinity and
then there was a movie made as well so
the man who knew infinity is worth
looking up on netflix or wherever you
can find it
the thing is about romano gen
nonetheless if you look into the details
he was absolutely certainly fallible
even when it came to mathematics and
even when it came to the theorems that
he wrote down
yes the majority of them when he wrote
them down it seemed to be the case that
they were true
he just couldn't provide the proof for
them other mathematicians were able to
provide the proof
romana jan had to learn how to do proofs
himself and that was what hardy was
doing how he was trying to
teach him the way that mathematicians
was done that mathematics was done by
the mathematical community
but the reverse didn't appear to happen
it wasn't like romantician was able to
teach hardy how
he was doing what he was doing
nonetheless i'm sure it could be learnt
it's just that we don't know how to
learn these things just like many people
don't know how to learn mathematics full
stop
the way in which romantian did
mathematics
it must have been done in his mind
somehow we know it had to be conjecture
and refutation that's the only way that
knowledge is made
it's created but precisely what the
method was because it wasn't a standard
method of proof
was for him not able to be explained to
anyone else so in other words it was
inexplicit knowledge that he had in this
it's probably similar to it could be
compared to the way in which a
great tennis player is able to play
tennis the way in which roger federer
is nine times out of ten able to serve
the ball at very high velocity
right into the place where he wants it
to go but he can't explain it he can try
he can try to explain he can try and put
words together
but that's not going to convey exactly
how to do what he does
same same is true probably over a
manager
and you can you can look up the fact
that yes some of the theorems that
romana jen wrote down
turned out could be um turned out
weren't true
okay you could you could prove that they
weren't true in fact so he was making
mistakes so even this method
available to him whatever it was itself
was of course fallible okay so
the only reason i'm emphasizing this is
because
there is something different about the
way in which romana jan was going about
doing what he
did but it wasn't like it was something
some it's not like romano jan
is proof positive that mathematics is
this domain of certain truth
and you can tap into that domain of
certain truth you can't tap into the
domain of certain truth you can
conjecture what it's like
if that's called tapping in but what
you're actually doing is you're trying
to explain
that realm that area of that area of
necessary truth
so romana jane had some way of
conjecturing what the necessary truth
was
without actually going through the proof
to get there first
so there must be some process we just
don't know what that is yet
no doubt one day we will know exactly
what he was doing
and we'll be able to teach other people
how to do that there might be a more
efficient way of doing mathematics than
what is presently done
which is starting from the axioms going
through the rules of inference and
getting to the conclusion which you call
your theorem
or using computers or whatever else okay
after that lengthy diversion
let's go back to the book and david
writes are these resemblances only
superficial
by the way the resemblances he's talking
about is this
search for truth and this discarding of
errors
between science and the arts and
mathematics indeed
are these resemblances only superficial
was beethoven fooling himself when he
thought that the sheets in his waste
paper basket contained mistakes
that they were worse than the sheets he
would eventually publish
was he merely meeting the arbitrary
standards of his culture like the 20th
century women who carefully adjusted
their hemlines each year
to conform to the latest fashions or is
there a real meaning in saying that the
music of beethoven mozart
was far above that of their stone age
ancestors
banging mammoth bones together as romana
jan's mathematics was above tally marks
okay pause there me again with a little
interjection
um so at this point this is the point
where
people object with the challenge you
can't tell who's objectively better
cardi b madonna acdc
your favorite k-pop girl group and
because you cannot objectively say
which one's better this is supposed to
be a refutation of that entire
philosophy this entire idea that there
is
any objectivity to the arts and in fact
this often happens with
aspects of the philosophy of david
deutsch
that a problem is not soluble right now
or rather that a problem does not have a
solution right now
a solution that we don't have a solution
for a particular problem
that this somehow entails there can be
no such solution
or that the problem is inherently
unsoluble this is wrong
the idea that problems are soluble the
idea that there is an objectivity to the
arts
does not entail that we know what all
those criteria are that we have a
solution
to what the objective criteria are for
the arts right now
so there may be a way of ranking these
singers
let's say or these bands but just
because we can't do it now
it does not mean there is no objectivity
to this at all and
as we will come to see there could be
there must be
a subjective component as well but we
could rank order them
in terms of the objective standards if
only we knew what the objective
standards were
we possibly are able to if you're an
expert in music know some of the
objective standards i'm certainly not an
expert in music but no doubt
a proper musician could probably write
down something
something to do with uh harmony
something to do with
quality of singing by some criteria and
so on because it certainly
is the case that i cannot tell who did
it better when it comes to these bands
the it being the music we all have our
opinions some will insist that
all classical music always outclasses
all pop music
and even pop music always outclasses
rap music but just because we do not
know what the objective criteria
is does not mean they do not exist and
as david rightly says
just there do you really think that some
stone age people bashing rocks together
cannot be distinguished from ravaldi's
concerto for two violins
well of course it can be of course there
is an objective difference it's not
merely subjective
everyone will agree everyone will be
able to tell the difference between
vivaldi and the rocks not merely in
terms of they sound different but one
sounds better one is something that you
are attracted to and that you would
prefer
to keep returning to and listening to if
you were
confined in prison and they gave you uh
the alternative either listening to
these loudly back
mammoth tusks together like bones or
rocks or whatever
or you can listen to vivaldi on a loop i
think most people
probably choose the valve so we know
that there is this
we know already there's an objective
difference between
noise uh disorganized type sound
poor music and better music
it is a course-grained way of ranking
things that we have at the moment but
that doesn't mean that it won't improve
indeed it will
we have a course-grained way of
understanding biology
and physics as well it's more refined
than what it is in the arts
but it's not to say in any of these
domains it's perfect
and the point here is that in the arts
the arts being the most difficult i
guess of the subjects in order to make
the case here about
realism about the fact that there are
objective criteria
it seems to be the case that people are
quite willing to admit that there's an
objective difference between what is
true and false in mathematics
what is true and false in physics indeed
then we start to get a bit wishy-washy
don't we when it comes to
morality and some people think that it's
merely subjective
and then sometimes even the people who
think that morality might have an
objective component they will deny the
fact that art can have any objective
component
one of the reasons for this and i guess
we'll return to this idea
is that too many people have simply been
trained at school
that anything can be art they've had
that conversation they've been taught
that well
duchamp's toilet or urinal rather
that that can be a work of art so much
of modern art is
of a silly kind and so we'll come back
to modern art modern art being the
equivalent
of relativism or post-modernism in
philosophy
a rejection of the idea of objective
criteria for beauty or objective
criteria for anything
and that art can indeed be anything at
all there's no truth of the matter
there's no better and worse
anything can be art therefore anyone can
be an artist and anyone can claim that
they've got the best art in the world
even if it's utter rubbish
in fact i'll skip the part that david
talks about next and go
straight to where he says quote
quite generally cultural relativism
about art or morality
has a very hard time explaining what
people are doing
when they think they are improving a
tradition then there is the equivalent
of instrumentalism
is art no more than a means to
non-artistic ends for instance
artistic creations can deliver
information a painting can depict
something and a piece of music can
represent an emotion but their beauty is
not primarily in that content
it is in the form for instance here is a
boring picture
and here is another picture with much
the same content
yet with greater aesthetic value
and of course if you're listening to
this on the podcast you won't know what
pictures i'm talking about
so i'd urge you to go to youtube or to
the book of course where those pictures
are
one can see that someone thought about
the second picture
in its composition framing cropping
lighting focus
it has the appearance of design by the
photographer but designed for what
unlike paley's watch it does not seem to
have a function
it only seems to be more beautiful than
the first picture but what does that
mean
just as an aside um everyone's a
photographer these days aren't we we've
all got
smartphones and they all have
astonishing cameras compared to anything
in the past they can do some amazing
things but
nonetheless we should all notice that
photography it turns out it's extremely
difficult unless you're particularly
talented or gifted in this there's a lot
of knowledge to learn
there's much to understand this idea of
simply
bringing things into focus this idea of
cropping this idea of thirds and so on
uh once you take a deep dive into
photography it can be uh
certainly a lifetime's worth of work no
people just don't understand what is
involved in this this is an
art form you know i think that most
people just think that
i hold the camera and point it at stuff
there is a heck of a lot more to it than
just that
it's kind of strange that um we all
carry around this instrument with us all
every single day which is such a
powerful artistic tool but so few of us
actually know how to use it it's rather
like we're all carrying around
violins um you know
and and playing them now and again you
know none of us really can
uh but we all think that we're
photographers to some extent and
um i know sometimes i do and you know
we're going to see some of my photos
today
i'm not a photographer but i'm trying to
improve it's something i'm trying to
learn let's go back to the book and
david writes
one possible instrumental purpose of
beauty is attraction
a beautiful object can be attractive to
people who appreciate the beauty
attractiveness to a given audience can
be functional and is a down-to-earth
scientifically measurable quantity
art can be literally attractive in the
sense of causing people to move towards
it
visitors to an art gallery can see a
painting and be reluctant to leave
and then later be caused by the painting
to return to it
people may travel great distances to
hear a musical performance and so on
if you see a work of art that you
appreciate that means that you want to
dwell on it
to give it your attention in order to
appreciate more in it
if you are an artist and halfway through
creating a work of art
you see something in it that you want to
bring out then you are being attracted
by a beauty that you have not yet
experienced
you are being attracted by the idea of a
piece of art
before you have created it not all
attractiveness has anything to do with
aesthetics
you lose your balance and full of log
because we're all attracted to the
planet earth
that may seem merely a play on the word
attraction
our attraction's worth is due not to
aesthetic appreciation
but to a law of physics which affects
artists no more than it does aardvarks
a red traffic light may induce us to
stop and stare at it so long as it
remains red
but that is not artistic appreciation
either even though it is attraction
it is mechanical but when analyzed in
sufficient detail
everything is mechanical the laws of
physics are sovereign so one can draw
the conclusion that beauty
cannot have an objective meaning other
than that which we are attracted to by
processes in our brains and hence by the
law of physics
so can one draw the conclusion that
beauty cannot have an objective meaning
other than
that which we are attracted to by
processes in our brains and hence by the
laws of physics
one cannot because by that argument the
physical world would not
exist objectively either since the laws
of physics also
determine what a scientist or
mathematician
wants to call true okay just emphasizing
that last bit
the laws of physics also determine
what a scientist or mathematician wants
to call true
okay just my reflection on that bit
so on that account that
what i will say is the false account
uh well it's not false it's true
but it's a bad explanation physics
causes you to think what you think
in a sense but it's not a good
explanation to say i'm thinking what i
think
simply because the laws of physics are
causing me to think what i think so
the the question is for anyone who is a
reductionist is that anything you think
is just an outworking of the laws of
physics including what you think is true
or false
about those laws of physics that's
hardly
a good explanation it's just a claim
about the universality of physics
the laws apply everywhere and at all
times including to the contents of your
own brain but if you want to
understand not merely
state a trope about the universal laws
of physics if you want to understand
understand mind you have a theory of
have an explanation about what is going
on in this case what is going on with
certain kinds of attractiveness
you have to move beyond mere physical
law indeed you have to move beyond
physical laws for the vast majority of
anything ins
outside of the physical sciences
skipping just a tiny little bit and
david
writes back to the book new art is
unpredictable
like new scientific discoveries is that
the unpredictability of randomness
or the deeper unknowability of knowledge
creation
paul's there sorry i'm doing a lot of
pausing today and interjecting on my own
stuff
so just to point on that randomness and
more on the side than anything else i
think it was sabine hoffenstadter the
physicist
who was the latest to get tangled up in
these concerns about
randomness or indeterminacy in quantum
theory and
the many worlds interpretation and so on
briefly this is the idea that one way of
going with quantum theory
is to say that what happens next in any
given experiment
is simply random and the reason
that people put this case to say that
well the laws of physics
create inherent randomness in nature is
because
they cannot predict the outcome of the
next experiment unlike in classical
physics where
if you're dropping a ball from a certain
height you can predict precisely where
it's going to land at any particular
moment
however if we're firing photons at a
double slit apparatus
experiment we cannot predict precisely
where that photon is going to end up on
the screen where the experiment is being
projected
okay so to some extent it appears as
though
this experiment is indeterminate but
what does that mean well it can't be the
case that it means
entirely random if it was entirely
random if there was nothing
governing this there was nothing
determining the outcome of
this experiment then whether the photon
hits there or there on the screen is not
random it would be random if once you
find the photon from the apparatus it
metamorphosized into an elephant or
disappeared entirely
into thin air and it never hit the
screen
neither of these two are consistent with
other known laws of physics namely
conservation of energy which we should
really regard as a principle
that other laws of physics have to
conform to but the point is that it's
not random
you fire a photon and a photon ends up
at the screen so
there's something there that is
continuous there's something there
that's a regularity in nature but
there's more than a reg
more than that in terms of regularity
nature there is a pattern that is built
up over time
and the pattern is predictable the
pattern is the regularity in nature
so although we can't predict the exact
place of
any given photon that is subjectively
unknown to
us nonetheless in the objective sense
there is certainly a law of physics that
determines what the pattern is going to
be
and that's not indeterminate at all it's
not a random pattern and that pattern
has an explanation and if you want to
know more about
these patterns in physics the laws of
physics that i'm talking about then see
the series on the multiverse or see
david's chapter on the multiverse in the
beginning of infinity
now the fact that you or i cannot
determine
the next place the photon lands that's a
fact about us
that's not a fact about the laws of
nature that's about us and our ignorance
that we can only see what's happening in
one particular universe at any given
time
and then that gets in to deep questions
about
the nature of personhood and the fact
that we occupy one place there's certain
um things that we don't understand but
we understand that much
that we occupy this particular universe
and we don't have access to the other
universes
where the other photons are going okay
that's all objective
so our ignorance about where the next
photon is going to land on the screen
is a fact about us but the fact about
the universe is that the photons will
that single photon will take up all
possible
positions on the screen and those
possible positions are given by the
relevant laws of physics
because we don't occupy all universes
the only way to test this is to repeat
the experiment over and over again
and approximate what would have happened
if you had a fire just one and been able
to see where it
went in all the other universes now
repeating the experiment over and over
again just simply means that you're
moving through time and time is a
special case of the different universes
so subjective indeterminacy by which i
mean
human ignorance the fact that we do not
know precisely what happens next is no
proof of objective indeterminacy
the claim that nothing determines the
position where the next photon will go
but something does determine it the laws
do if there were no laws then we could
expect a photon to
vanish utterly into thin air or to turn
into a man riding a bicycle or something
but those things don't happen it's not
utterly random
because there are laws to be obeyed here
there are quantum laws of physics to
obey here
so that's that this this idea that
david mentions there just in passing of
the unpredictability of randomness is
the unpredictability
of subjective randomness things are only
subjective random they appear to be
random to us because we don't have
knowledge of the situation of everything
that we need to know in order to
make the prediction and indeed so far as
we know it's impossible for us to make a
prediction
uh of that kind about where the photon
is going to land let's say
but there's also another kind of
unpredictability which is to do with the
unknown ability as david says there of
knowledge creation
and continuing david says quote
in other words is art truly creative
like science and mathematics
that question is usually asked the other
way around because the idea of
creativity
is still rather confused by various
misconceptions
empiricism miscasts science as an
automatic
non-creative process and art though
acknowledged as creative
has often been seen as the antithesis of
science and hence irrational
random inexplicable and hence
unjudgeable
and non-objective but if beauty is
objective
then a new work of art like a newly
discovered law of nature or mathematical
theorem
adds something irreducibly new to the
world
paused my reflection so another
confusion
brought to you by your local high school
i would say
we're taught this more or less aren't we
well at least it used to be the case
i was taught this at least at least
implicitly
art is where you do creative stuff and
science is where you simply learn about
reality and you've got no choice in the
matter
i should say there's been at least some
kind of renaissance in
science teaching and now at least at
least lip services paid to the
idea that in mathematics and
in science there can be creativity
however
the actual teaching of mathematics and
science in schools especially
mathematics is still
very much rote learning you go through
and do exercises
which is the appropriate word for what's
going on there
nevertheless culture is still satisfied
with the idea that art's creative
and science is just an uncreative
reporting
of what reality is like but that latter
view is the misconception of empiricism
of course it casts
the scientist as a reader of nature
rather than the creator of explanations
of course it's not it's not unrestrained
creativity creativity without any
constraint
is nonsense and non-art there are
criticisms to be made
creativity and criticism together make
the theory closer to true or in art
more beautiful as david observes the
waste paper basket of the composer fills
up over time
as they criticize their creativity and
refine it in line with some criteria of
beauty or harmony
if you have only criticisms and no
creativity
then you end up making no progress at
all because you just say that everything
is bad
or worse than what you currently have
and if you have creativity
unencumbered by criticism then you
produce poor quality
or you regress so this idea of
creativity and criticism together is
very important and i would say that
criticisms
when done properly typically have a
large creative element to them as well
you can invent new ways of criticizing
things you can improve the ways in which
you criticize something
so even criticism is a creative act to a
large extent too
okay skipping a little david writes
art does not consist of repetition but
in human tastes there can be genuine
novelty
because we are universal explainers we
are not simply obeying our genes
for instance humans often act in ways
that are contrary to any preferences
that might plausibly have been built
into our genes
people fast sometimes for aesthetic
reasons some abstain from sex
people act in very diverse ways for
religious reasons or for any number of
other reasons philosophical or
scientific practical or whimsical
we have an inborn aversion to heights
into falling yet people go skydiving
not in spite of this feeling but because
of it it is that very feeling
of inborn aversion that humans can
reinterpret
into a larger picture which to them is
attractive
they want more of it they want to
appreciate it more deeply
to a skydiver the vista from which we
were born to recoil is beautiful
the whole activity of skydiving is
beautiful and the part of that beauty is
in the very sensations that evolve to
deter us from trying it
the conclusion is inescapable that
attraction is not inborn
just as the contents of a newly
discovered law of physics or
mathematical theorem are not inborn
pause there my reflection on this this
is a perfect
refutation or at least criticism very
strong criticism
of the evolutionary psychologists
evolutionary psychologists suggest
or state strongly that our behavior
or at least some of our behaviors are
determined or at least partially
determined
by our genes now
it's no doubt the case that there are
inborn ideas that we have
and no doubt the case that genetics can
provide some mental content
this is all true but none of that is to
say
that it needs to determine particular
behavior and by determine i mean
unavoidably unchangeably you will be
inevitably forced into that particular
behavior because you've got a gene for
that particular behavior let's say
i don't think there is any gene for a
particular kind of behavior there might
be a gene for a particular sensation
some people might experience pain more
than others they have genes for higher
levels of pain
certainly some people can taste
different things we certainly know that
females have
genes for detecting greater
shades of red than what males do in
humans
men typically have better night vision
than what women do
these are genetic differences but
none of this is to say that we are
compelled into certain kinds of behavior
that just because women have a better
ability to appreciate the color red
they can see more of it more shades of
it
that therefore they're going to be drawn
into the arts or the visual arts more
than what men
are that it is determined that you
are forever closed off from being a
visual artist because you're a man
that's clearly not the case now this
idea here
that if you're going to be if anything's
going to be determined
one would think then it is the fear of
heights that
many people have the fear of falling
from a great height
so you know it might be the case that
there is this
gene fall or this just genetic component
two
what many people experience as fear of
heights
reasonable fear of heights you shouldn't
want to get too close to the cliff
because you might fall off
so the genes want to preserve themselves
so they may give this sensation
which causes an idea in the mind of
moving away from high places
now the evolutionary psychologist may
wish to say well that's all genetically
determined
there we go it's proof that there is a
gene or at least some genetic
component to fear of heights
and quite rightly a fear of heights okay
then explain how it is that people who
skydive do not have such a fear of
heights
or if they do whatever this fear is this
word
fear has been replaced or changed to
such an extent that it now becomes
enjoyable thrilling is it the same
sensation
don't know i imagine it's not quite the
same sensation
because i know of people who are so
terrified of heights
that they literally collapse far away
from the cliff edge
that if they're on a bridge they can't
get across the bridge they're so afraid
of it
they appear to be an actual physical
pain
certainly in mental anguish but on the
other hand we have these other people
who are willing to go up far higher than
that and jump from perfectly functioning
aircraft
not something i do but
it seems that if there's genes for this
sensation then this sensation can be
reinterpreted by the mind
it depends on what you know about what's
going on
some people who have been afraid of
heights become
skydivers they can reinterpret it is it
the same sensation
i doubt it fear of water is another one
people who've never learned to swim may
very well fear the ocean
and rightly feed the ocean others have
no such fear
so is the fear of the water or fear of
the ocean something that's inborn or is
it as
you can be trained into this fear or out
of this sphere
as a child and depending upon what you
learn as a child
determines what uh you feel as an adult
but even then it's not completely fixed
you can change your ideas as i keep on
saying
humans have ideas they're not defined by
them and so you can change any
particular
idea you have i think one of david's
other examples is
of course that if we have a gene for
anything
in common with all other life forms it's
this
drive to survive this
no matter what we will try to eat drink
breathe air we will do the things that
is required
in order for us to survive it's the
first thing in maslow's hierarchy of
needs okay
all of those things that we need to
survive we're going to prioritize
so surely that's genetic if anything's
genetic it is this will to survive this
will to live
and yet we're not completely alone
amongst all species in in doing this but
so many people
commit suicide some people become
suicide bombers some people just
simply die every day of suicide it's
terrible
it's sad but their deaths sadly
are a refutation of this idea that we
have this
genetically determined kind of behavior
if any behavior was going to be
genetically determined
then surely it would be the behavior of
trying to survive yet so many people
every single day
kill themselves now the evolutionary
psychologists might say at this point
well you know they might have a defect
in that gene
or in those sets of genes and that
causes them to kill themselves well at
this point
then what you're saying is that no
matter what the behavior is there's a
genetic component to it
and so therefore it's a explanation that
explains everything it is a general
purpose explanation
that no matter what the behavior is it
can always be explained
by recourse the genes in other words
there is
no way of refuting it it's not
scientific now on our side of the ledger
we're not denying that it's possible
that some kinds of behavior
can be influenced by the genes
absolutely
you know of course simple examples are
some people have certain i think this
has been
tested i'm not sure i think it's been
tested that
some people have genes for liking the
taste of asparagus because they can
actually smell it and some people cannot
smell asparagus
or there's certain other kinds of foods
some people can taste this kind of food
because they have the genes for
that kind of smell or that kind of odor
and so they're attracted towards those
foods and some people do not have such
genes and in that case of course there's
a genetic component to whether or not
you like this particular food
because you have particularly sensitive
salt receptors
or bitter receptors so you prefer this
kind of food and you don't prefer this
kind of food that makes perfect sense
there's genes for certain kinds of
mental illness let's say and that causes
certain behaviors so
we're not denying the fact that there
can be genes
implicated in the explanation of certain
kinds of behavior
but what we are saying is that whatever
those behaviors are
they can be themselves reinterpreted by
the universal mind
by the explainer by the person who may
not like the fact that they're attracted
to this
that or the other thing or they have
this so-called mental illness and they
want to change their behaviors
if they learn better then whatever that
genetic influence is
can be reinterpreted in the same way the
skydiver who may very well have started
out with
a terrible fear of heights has now
reinterpreted
that sensation that's coming to them via
some genetic
impulse that has caused certain
sensations in their body
to be reinterpreted and changed so that
their behavior utterly changes
ultimately that even if they have this
sensation of
whatever it is this this fear when they
go near
to a high place that can be
reinterpreted to be
something they really love and become
attracted to so they can turn
something that is a initially a
repulsion into an attraction
now the gene the gene theory surely
can't explain that
unless of course you're willing to go
down the road of saying they were never
actually afraid of it in the first place
i don't know anyway i'm waxing lyrical
about that i better get back to
reading the book david's talking about
could art be purely cultural so moving
on from there
quote we pursue beauty as well as truth
and in both cases we can be fooled
perhaps we see a face as beautiful
because it really is
or perhaps it is only because of a
combination of our genes and culture
a beetle is attracted to another beetle
that you and i may see as hideous
but not if you're an entomologist people
can learn
to see many things as beautiful or ugly
but there again people can also learn to
see false scientific theories as true
and true once is false yet there is such
a thing as objective
scientific truth so that still does not
tell us whether there is such a thing as
objective beauty
just pause down my reflection just very
quickly in david's
video on his own youtube channel
about wire flowers beautiful which is an
extension
of this chapter basically there is
the question is asked well you know
basically the question is about
the fact that there is no agreement on
what beautiful art is or even on what
beautiful flowers are you know in the i
think the fellow says on the spectrum of
all flowers not everyone will agree
but david quite rightly responds to that
with well not everyone agrees
on scientific truth either the mere fact
consensus is not the way in which we
assess objective truth whether that's in
science or art
so just because we don't have universal
consensus unanimity
on any scientific theory has no effect
upon the truth of the scientific theory
or otherwise
the overwhelming majority of people on
the face of planet earth right now
do not understand and typically reject
the theory of evolution by natural
selection
most people remain religious believers
they believe that god created
all the life on the face of the planet
they don't believe that we evolved from
simpler life forms they don't understand
that we evolved from similar forms but
the fact we don't have consensus on that
has no bearing on whether or not that
theory is true the same is true of
the theory of climate change it has
absolutely nothing to do with the fact
that
many people disagree with it that's
whether it's true or not science
continues to make progress
nonetheless the vast majority of people
do not understand the theory of gravity
einstein's general theory of relativity
but we still make
gps satellites work we still use the
theory for practical applications
so too with art you know just because we
do not understand
or can come to some we do not understand
what the criteria is
and hence do not have a consensus on
what
the best kind of music is does not mean
there
won't be in the future some criteria
which we'll be able to agree upon
that will enable us to assess or improve
music let's say okay now moving into the
i guess the central question of the
chapter
and david has this picture and he says
quote now why is a flower the shape that
it is
because the relevant genes evolved to
make it attractive to insects
why would they do this because when
insects visit a flower they are dusted
with pollen which they then deposit in
other flowers of the same species
and so the genes and the dna in that
pollen are spread far and wide
this is the reproductive mechanism that
flowering plants evolved
and which most still use today before
there were insects there were no flowers
on earth
but the mechanism could work only
because insects at the same time
evolved genes that attracted them to
flowers why did they
because flowers provide nectar which is
food just as there is co-evolution
between the genes to coordinate mating
behaviours in males and females of the
same species
so genes for making flowers and giving
them their shapes and colours co-evolved
with jeans and insects for recognizing
flowers with
the best nectar during that biological
co-evolution
just as in the history of art criteria
evolved
and means of meeting those criteria
co-evolve with them
that is what gave flowers the knowledge
of how to attract insects and insects
the knowledge of how to recognize those
flowers
and the propensity to fly towards them
but what is surprising
is that those same flowers also attract
humans this is so familiar a fact
that it is hard to see how amazing it is
but think of all the countless hideous
animals in nature and think of all of
them
who find their mates by sight have
evolved to find that appearance
attractive
and therefore it is not surprising that
we do not
with predators and prey there is a
similar co-evolution but in a
competitive sense rather than a
cooperative one
each has genes that evolve to enable it
to recognize the other and to make it
run towards or away from from it
respectively
while other genes evolved to make their
organism hard to recognize against the
relevant background
that is why tigers are striped
occasionally it happens by chance that
the parochial criteria of attractiveness
that evolve within a species
produce something that looks beautiful
to us the peacock's tail is an example
but that is a rare anomaly in the
overwhelming majority of species
we do not share any of their criteria
for finding something attractive
yet with flowers most flowers we do
sometimes a leaf can be beautiful even a
puddle of water can
but again only by rare chance with
flowers it's reliable
it is another regularity in nature what
is the explanation
why are flowers beautiful given the
prevailing assumptions in the scientific
community
which are still rather empiricist and
reductionist it may seem plausible that
flowers are not
objectively beautiful and that their
attractiveness is merely a cultural
phenomenon
but i think that fails closer inspection
we find flowers beautiful
that we have never seen before and which
have not been known to our culture
before
and quite reliably for most humans in
most cultures
the same is not true of the roots of the
plants or the leaves
why only the flowers one unusual aspect
of the flower insect co-evolution is
that it involved the creation of a
complex code or language
for signaling information between
species
it had to be complex because the genes
were facing a difficult communication
problem
the code had to be on the one hand
easily recognizable by the right insects
and on the other difficult to forge by
other species of flower
for if other species could cause their
pollen to be spread by the same insects
without having to manufacture nectar for
them
which requires energy they would have a
selective advantage
so the criteria was that evolving in the
insects had to be discriminating enough
to pick the right flowers and not crude
imitations
and the flowers design had to be such
that no design that other flower species
could easily evolve could be mistaken
for it
thus both the criterion and the means of
meeting it
had to be hard to vary okay just
skipping a little bit
uh he talks about giraffes and why their
necks along
and we get into this idea a little more
of
signaling between these disparate
species between the flowers and
the insects how is it that well from one
insect to another there can be
different flowers that they are
attracted to i'll mention that a little
bit later
david writes my guess is that the
easiest way to signal across such a gap
with hard to forge patterns designed to
be recognized by
hard to emulate pattern matching
algorithms is to use
objective standards of beauty so flowers
have to create objective beauty
and insects have to recognize objective
beauty
consequently the only species that are
attracted by flowers and
are the insect species that co-evolve to
do so and humans
pause down by reflection but why humans
because we can understand things
we can understand things now with with
um the insects it's clearly only the
genes
the genes are just finding that thing
attractive they're literally being drawn
towards those flowers
and then they are pollinating the
flowers as well so it's beneficial to
the flowers
so this this objectivity that exists out
there in reality this objective beauty
that exists out there in reality
has been discovered by the
uh genetic code in the form of the
flower to attract the insects and
us humans being people being able to
understand the world
are able to uncover these objective
features about reality
which includes objective beauty okay
back to the book david writes if true
this means that dawkins daughter was
partly right about the flowers after all
they are there to make the world pretty
or at least prettiness is no accidental
side effect
but is what they specifically evolved to
have not because
anything intended the world to be pretty
but because the best replicating genes
depend upon embodying objective
prettiness
to get themselves replicated the case of
honey for instance is very different
the reason that honey which is sugar
water is easy for flowers and bees to
make
and why it's taste as attractive to
humans and insects alike is that we do
all have a shared genetic heritage going
back to our common ancestor and before
which includes biochemical knowledge
about many uses of sugar and the means
to recognize it
okay so just to emphasize that me
talking here
we share a common ancestor with insects
so
it is no huge mystery as to why we
should like honey
because well honey contains nutrients
and
all these living organisms create crave
nutrients require nutrients
and we recognize that the taste of honey
the sweetness of honey that's attractive
to us
because we needed to survive so it's no
accident that of course it's in the
genes we share genes for this thing
but with flowers and else finding them
attractive
well there's no common set of genes
going on here because if there was then
it should be the case that
uh all the species of apes and monkeys
and so on that we share common ancestors
with should also find
flowers attractive or at least something
lower down the phylogenic tree
should also find flowers attractive but
nothing else does it's just
humans and the insects rather than
cats and dogs they're not attracted to
flowers either okay so this is this is
strange unusual it requires explanation
uh
back to the book david writes could it
be that what humans find attractive in
flowers or in art is indeed objective
but it is not objective beauty perhaps
it is something more mundane something
like
a liking for bright colors strong
contrasts symmetrical shapes
humans seem to have an inborn liking for
symmetry it is thought to be a factor in
sexual attractiveness
and it may also be useful in helping us
to classify things and to organize our
environment physically and conceptually
so a side effect of these inborn
preferences might be a liking for
flowers
which happen to be colorful and
symmetrical however some flowers are
white
at least to us they may have colors that
we cannot see and insects can but we
still find their shapes beautiful
all flowers do contrast with their
background in some sense that is a
precondition for being used for
signaling
but a spider in the bath contrasts with
its background even more
and there is no widespread consensus
that such a site is beautiful
as for symmetry again spiders are quite
symmetrical while some flowers such as
orchids
are very unsymmetrical yet we do not
find them any less attractive for that
so i do not think that symmetry colour
and contrast are all
that we are seeing in flowers when we
imagine that we are seeing beauty
a sort of mirror image of that objection
is that there are other things in nature
that we also find beautiful
things that are not the results of
either human creativity or co-evolution
across a gap
the night sky waterfalls sunsets so why
not flowers too
but the cases are not alike those things
may be attractive to look at
but they have no appearance of design
they are analogous not to paley's watch
but to the sun as a time keeper
one cannot explain why the watch is as
it is without referring to time keeping
because it would be useless for time
keeping if it had been made slightly
differently
but as i mentioned the sun would still
be useful for keeping time even if the
solar system were altered
similarly paley might have found a stone
that looked attractive
he might well have taken it home to use
as an ornamental paper weight
but he would not have sat down to write
a monograph about how changing any
detail of the stone
would have made it incapable of serving
that function because that would not
have been so
the same is true of the night sky
waterfalls and almost
all other natural phenomena but flowers
do have the appearance of design for
beauty
if they looked like leaves or roots they
would lose their universal appeal
displace even one petal and there would
be diminishment
we know what the watch was designed for
but we do not know what beauty
is we are in a similar position to an
archaeologist who finds inscriptions in
an unknown language in an ancient
tomb they look like writing and not just
meaningless marks on the walls
conceivably this is mistaken but they
look as though they were inscribed there
for a purpose
flowers are like that they have the
appearance of having been evolved for a
purpose
which we call beauty which we can
imperfectly recognize
but whose nature is poorly understood in
the light of these arguments i can see
only one explanation for the phenomenon
of flowers being attracted to humans
and for the various other fragments of
evidence i have mentioned
it is that the attribute we call beauty
is of two kinds
one is a parochial kind of
attractiveness local to a species to a
culture or to an individual
the other is unrelated to any of those
it is universal and as objective as the
laws of physics
creating either kind of beauty requires
knowledge but the second kind requires
knowledge with universal reach
it reaches all the way from the flower
genome with its problem of competitive
pollination
to human minds which appreciate the
resulting flowers as art
not great art human artists are far
better as is to be expected
but with the hard to fake appearance of
design for beauty
so there david has talked about the
parochial kind of attractiveness
local to a species to a culture or to an
individual even and this idea of local
to an individual let's say
is a subjective kind of beauty
and as i began this episode with
everyone can make that easy argument
we've all got different tastes so
it's subjective but that's so easy we
already know that we already know that
there is this subjectivity to
attractiveness
so yes it's subjective but it's also
objective
there is an objective component there's
an objective kind of beauty
and this signaling across species is
curious
and requires explanation butterflies are
attracted to red roses
bees are not and people find all kinds
of flowers attractive
beautiful now back to the book david
writes
now why do humans appreciate that
objective beauty if there has been no
equivalent of that co-evolution in our
past
at one level the answer is simply that
we are universal explainers
and can create knowledge about anything
but still why did we want to create
aesthetic knowledge in particular
it is because we did face the same
problem as the flowers and the insects
signaling across the gap between two
humans is analogous to signaling across
the gap between two entire species
a human being in terms of knowledge
content and creative individuality
is like a species all the individuals of
any other species
have virtually the same programming in
their genes and use virtually the same
criteria
for acting and being attracted humans
are quite unlike that
the amount of information in a human
mind is more than that
in the genome of any species and
overwhelmingly more than the genetic
information unique to one person
so human artists are trying to signal
across the same scale of gap between
humans
as the flowers and insects are between
species
they can use some species specific
criteria but they can also reach towards
objective beauty
exactly the same is true of all other
knowledge we can communicate with other
people by sending predetermined messages
determined by our genes or culture or we
can invent something new
but in the latter case to have any
chance of communicating we had better
strive to rise above parochialism
and seek universal truths this may be
the proximate reason that humans ever
began to do so
okay so pause there my reflection and
i'm skipping a part and david goes
more into these two kinds of beauty and
so i just want to emphasize that again
we've got this
subjective component to beauty this
subjective parochial
kind of beauty and on the other hand we
have this objective beauty as well
and no doubt in art when it comes to
visual art no doubt this is what
happens and no doubt in music this is
what happened as well
that we have this coming together of the
subjective and the objective component
and david talks about this the the
pursuit of art for arts and sake which
you might call the pure kind of art
versus an applied kind of art
so the applied kind is you know the art
that serves a practical
purpose so in my as he says to give more
cohesiveness to a culture or advance a
political agenda or even to advertise
beverages so that would be an applied
kind of art
but then there is also just pursuing art
for art's sake
which is something that's done in
mathematics as well so it has this
analog in mathematics there's pure and
there's applied mathematics
pure mathematics done for no other
reason than someone just finds
mathematics fascinating interesting and
they want to solve problems in
mathematics
with no application to the physical
world by the way even when
mathematicians say that's what they're
doing hardy who i mentioned earlier who
wrote
the mathematician's apology to helped
ramanujan come to great britain
he actually remarked that he was proud
of the fact that
very little of his own mathematics that
he was doing would ever have any
practical application
it turned out that it did later on if
you read about
g h hardy okay now when it comes to art
we're also talking about
movies we're talking about fiction books
and david writes on this quote
in fiction there as i mentioned in
chapter 11 a good story has a good
explanation of the fictional events that
it portrays
but the same is true in all art forms
in some it is especially hard to express
in words the explanation of the beauty
of a particular work of art
even if one knows it because the
relevant knowledge is itself
not expressed in words it is inexplicit
no one yet knows how to translate
musical explanations into natural
language
yet when a piece of music has the
attribute displace one note and there
would be diminishment
there is an explanation it was known to
the composer and it is known to the
listeners who appreciate it
one day it will be expressible in words
okay
pause in my reflection so this is um a
one of those points that can just blow
by you if you're not paying attention
it's this idea that artists
know that they're striving for something
artists that are trying to do good
objectively beautiful art trying to do
objectively better music
they're communicating one from another
you know the musician is aiming for this
particular thing that is better than
what has gone before
or at least better than what they've
produced before they're trying to create
something new bring something new and
beautiful in the world
but they cannot always explain what's
going on they do not have an explicit
explanation
of exactly why the thing is more
beautiful than
the other alternatives that they could
have made they might have some ideas but
they won't be able to provide a
comprehensive
explanation such that having given it to
someone else that person can then learn
how to do
exactly what they've done okay and then
david goes through
some reasons for art the
purposes of art and so i'll just read
the ute on the utilitarian theories of
art
and david writes there are utilitarian
theories of the purpose of art
these theories deprecate pure art just
as pure science and mathematics are
deprecated by the same arguments
but one has no choice about what
constitutes an artistic improvement any
more than one has a choice as to what is
true and false in mathematics
and if one tries to tune one's
scientific theories or philosophical
positions to meet a political agenda
or a personal preference then one is at
cross-purposes
art can be used for many purposes but
artistic values are not subordinate to
or derived from
anything else the same critique applies
to the theory that art is
self-expression
expression is conveying something that
is already there
while objective progress in art is about
creating something new
also self-expression is about expressing
something subjective
while pure art is objective for the same
reason
any kind of art that consists solely of
spontaneous or mechanical acts
such as throwing paint onto canvas or of
pickling sheep
lacks the means of making artistic
progress because real progress is
difficult
and involves many errors for every
success poor semi-reflection
yet just go to a museum of modern art
and you will see
this kind of thing and i think throwing
paint onto a canvas that's pro hard
isn't it the artist
um oh mr hart what a mess um
if you don't know what i'm talking about
i'll i'll find that advertisement
beautiful beautiful
fortunately carpet with stainmaster
five-year stain resistance guarantee oh
mr heart what a mess nearly finito
dupont
stainmaster state-of-the-art in carpets
yes so it's
it's hard to make progress with
something like that
okay back to the book david writes
if i am right then the future of art is
as mind-boggling as the future of every
other kind of knowledge
art of the future can create unlimited
increases in beauty
i can only speculate but we can
presumably expect new kinds of
unification too
when we understand better what elegance
really is perhaps we shall find
new and better ways to seek truth using
elegance or beauty
i guess that we shall also be able to
design new senses
a new qualia that can encompass beauty
of new kinds literally inconceivable to
us now
what is it like to be a bat is a famous
question asked by the philosopher thomas
nagle
more precisely what would it be like for
a person to have the echolocation census
of a bat
perhaps the full answer is that in the
future it will be not so much the task
of philosophy to discover
what that is like but the task of
technological art
to give us the experience itself end
quote end of the chapter
what a fantastic chapter what a positive
optimistic
typical way that david has left us there
um this idea that perhaps art can be a
window
into consciousness and qualia as well
that art that artistic advances might be
one of the ways that we can make
philosophical advances on this
particular front
who knows and just that last
paragraph there it's a real message to
artists as well
artists should take note of that note in
particular don't run down your own
subject i'm no artist but
i have to defend art sometimes against
artists we want to say
to some of the artists at least do not
always be
parochial do not always turn
to try to turn your art into a vehicle
forever
deconstructing what is true or good or
known
taking a piece of good art that's
already there and simply repurposing it
and that becomes your art or to convey
political meanings let's say or some
other deeper message
sure all of those things can be art and
are done as art routinely these days
you know we might even argue that some
of them can be important functions of
art
that's the utilitarian theory of art but
there's no reason for artists
art teachers art students to denigrate
or even deny
that other aspect of art the search for
objective beauty and the creation of
ever better
objectively ever better kinds of art
new kinds of film new ways of appealing
to the senses that go beyond the
two-dimensional the three-dimensional
new and better music and these kinds of
art can have
as david says reach infinite reach
rather than to trump's toilet which has
no reach
it is art only in the sense that
everything is art and if everything and
anything can be art then art
is meaningless almost every student of
art seems to some extent be making the
case
of undermining their own area of
expertise
if everything can be art then as i say
everyone can be a great artist as there
is no distinction between the good
and the terrible and no standards by
which to assess quality
but beauty objective beauty is a quality
we should want to learn
far more about so we can make the world
more beautiful
but if we deny this if it's all just a
matter of opinion
how can we expect to solve problems of
an ugly world
as always thank you and thank you to my
patreon
supporters uh if you'd like to
contribute to patreon just search for me
on google and you will find
brett hall patreon or topcast patreon
and
it's always much appreciated thank you
[Music]
you